# Crat

**C**-originated **R**ust **A**dvancing **T**ransformer

## Setup

To build and run ownership analysis, install the Z3 development package and Cargo.

On Ubuntu/Debian:

```bash
apt-get install libz3-dev
```

## Preparation

You should first build the `deps_crate` crate, which provides dependencies to
compile the Rust program to be transformed. You only need to do this once.

```bash
cargo build --manifest-path deps_crate/Cargo.toml
```

## Usage

Here, we explain an example workflow to translate a C project to Rust using
C2Rust and Crat. The example project is a simple program that reads five
integers from the standard input and prints their sum. The C source code is
under `examples/sum`. In the following steps, we assume that the `~/rs` and
`~/rs-transformed` directories exist. You may use other paths as you like.

First, run the following commands to create `compile_commands.json` using
[`intercept-build`](https://github.com/rizsotto/scan-build):

```bash
cd examples/sum
intercept-build make
cd ../..
```

Then, run C2Rust to obtain the initial Rust code. `c2rust-transpile` should be
on your PATH. We recommend using [our custom
version](https://github.com/Medowhill/c2rust/tree/tractor-0.21.0) based on
C2Rust 0.21.0. Make sure you check out the `tractor-0.21.0` branch after cloning
the repository.

```bash
c2rust-transpile -e -o ~/rs/sum examples/sum/compile_commands.json
```

This will create `~/rs/sum` containing the generated Rust code.

Finally, run Crat to transform the Rust code:

```bash
cargo run --bin crat -- \
  -o ~/rs-transformed \
  --unsafe-remove-unused \
  --unsafe-remove-no-mangle \
  --unsafe-remove-extern-c \
  --unexpand-use-print \
  --bin-name sum \
  --pass expand,extern,preprocess,pointer,io,libc,static,simpl,unsafe,unexpand,split,bin \
  ~/rs/sum
```

This will create `~/rs-transformed/sum` containing the transformed Rust code.
Run the following commands to run the program:

```bash
echo 1 2 3 4 5 | cargo run --manifest-path ~/rs-transformed/sum/Cargo.toml
```

The expected output is as follows:

```
Sum: 15
```

## Benchmarks

To compile and run benchmark programs, the following packages and tools are
required:

```bash
apt-get install curl freeglut3-dev gcc git less libao-dev libasound2-dev \
  libavcodec-dev libavfilter-dev libavformat-dev libavutil-dev libc6-dev \
  libcrypt-dev libcurl4-gnutls-dev libev-dev libevent-dev libfftw3-dev \
  libfuse-dev libfuse3-dev libgcrypt20-dev libgl-dev libglu1-mesa-dev \
  libgmp-dev libidn2-dev libiniparser-dev libjson-c-dev liblzma-dev \
  libncurses-dev libpcap0.8-dev libpcre3-dev libpq-dev libpulse-dev \
  librdkafka-dev libreadline-dev librtlsdr-dev libselinux1-dev libssl-dev \
  libunistring-dev libusb-1.0-0-dev libwww-perl libx11-dev libxau-dev \
  libxcomposite-dev libxdamage-dev libxext-dev libxfixes-dev libxrandr-dev \
  libxrender-dev locales make nettle-dev php7.4-cli postgresql-server-dev-12 \
  pulseaudio redis-server squeezelite sudo time uuid-dev zlib1g-dev
```

```bash
pip install pytest cram
```

In addition, the username should be `ubuntu`, and using Ubuntu 20.04 is
recommended.

You may use the `kaistplrg/crat-test-user:1.1.2` Docker image, which meets the
above requirements.

Benchmark programs are under `benchmarks/rs`. Each directory corresponds to each
benchmark and contains Rust code generated by C2Rust. You can run Crat to
transform the benchmark programs.

`tool.py` is a Python script that allows you to easily transform the benchmarks,
build the transformed code, and run their test suites. It can be executed with a
command of the following form:

```bash
./tool.py <command> <stage> <benchmark>
```

The command can be one of the following:

* `transform`: Transform the benchmark program(s).
* `build`: Build the transformed benchmark program(s).
* `test`: Run the test suite of the transformed benchmark program(s).
* `clean`: Remove the transformed benchmark program(s).

The stage specifies the directories being the source and the destination of the
transformation and also the passes to be applied. The following stages are
available:

* `expand`: From `rs` to `rs-expand` by applying `expand`.
* `extern`: From `rs-expand` to `rs-extern` by applying `preprocess,extern`.
* `extern-post`: From `rs-extern` to `rs-extern-post` by applying
  `unsafe,unexpand,split,bin`.

The benchmark is the name of the benchmark program to be processed, which is the
name of the directory under `benchmarks/rs`. For example, the following command
processes the `avl` benchmark:

```bash
./tool.py transform expand avl
```

If the given name does not match any of them, any benchmark whose name starts
with the given name will be processed. For example, the following command
processes the `proxychains` and `proxychains-ng` benchmarks:

```bash
./tool.py transform expand proxy
```

The benchmark name is an optional argument. If no benchmark is specified, all
benchmarks will be processed. For example, the following command processes all
benchmarks:

```bash
./tool.py transform expand
```

You can use the `--exclude` option to exclude benchmarks whose names start with
a certain prefix. This is especially useful when you want to process all
benchmarks except for a few of them. For example, the following command
processes all benchmarks except for `proxychains` and `proxychains-ng`:

```bash
./tool.py transform expand --exclude proxy
```

You can exclude multiple benchmarks by specifying the `--exclude` option
multiple times or by separating the names with commas. For example, the
following commands process all benchmarks except for `avl`, `proxychains`, and
`proxychains-ng`:

```bash
./tool.py transform expand --exclude avl --exclude proxy
```

```bash
./tool.py transform expand --exclude avl,proxy
```

When processing multiple benchmarks, `tool.py` immediately aborts if any of them
fails to be processed. To continue processing the remaining benchmarks even upon
failure, use the `--keep-going` option:

```bash
./tool.py transform expand --keep-going
```

If there are failed benchmarks, `tool.py` will show the list of them at the end
of the output.

### Transform

The following command transforms `avl` to the `expand` stage:

```bash
./tool.py transform expand avl
```

This will not transform the code if `benchmarks/rs-expand/avl` already exists.
To overwrite the existing code, use the `--overwrite` option:

```bash
./tool.py transform expand avl --overwrite
```

`tool.py` runs Crat in the release mode by default. If you want to run it in the
debug mode, you need to set the `DEBUG` environment variable:

```bash
DEBUG=1 ./tool.py transform expand avl
```

This would be useful when inspecting the stack traces or frequently re-compiling
Crat during development.

If the stage depends on another stage, the `tool.py` will automatically
transform the required stage first if it has not been transformed yet. For
example, the following command transforms `avl` to the `expand` stage if
necessary, and then transforms it to the `extern` stage:

```bash
./tool.py transform extern avl
```

Note that the `--overwrite` option only applies to the last stage by default.
Therefore, the following command never overwrites the `expand` stage:

```bash
./tool.py transform extern avl --overwrite
```

To overwrite other stages, you can increase the depth by using the
`--overwrite-depth` option:

```bash
./tool.py transform extern avl --overwrite --overwrite-depth 2
```

The default depth is 1, and any positive integer is allowed. When `max` is
given, all stages will be overwritten:

```bash
./tool.py transform extern avl --overwrite --overwrite-depth max
```

### Build

The following command builds the transformed `avl` in the `expand` stage:

```bash
./tool.py build expand avl
```

This will automatically transform `avl` to the `expand` stage if it has not
been transformed yet. To overwrite the existing code, use the `--overwrite`
option:

```bash
./tool.py build expand avl --overwrite
```

`tool.py` builds the transformed code in the release mode by default. If you
want to build it in the debug mode, use the `--debug` option:

```bash
./tool.py build expand avl --debug
```

### Test

The following command runs the test suite of the transformed `avl` in the
`extern-post` stage:

```bash
./tool.py test extern-post avl
```

As in `build`, `--overwrite` and `--debug` options can be used.

### Clean

The following command remove the transformed `avl` in the `expand` stage:

```bash
./tool.py clean expand avl
```

When multiple benchmarks are to be cleaned at once, a confirmation prompt will
be displayed before removing them. To skip the confirmation, use the `--yes` or
`-y` option:

```bash
./tool.py clean expand --yes
```
